Hi, I'm Brian Caffo and this is
the lecture on Blocking and Adjustment.
So let's start talking about this
problem by putting it into a context.
Imagine if you're looking at improving
mobility among the elderly and
you want to do this using fitness tracker,
so I think for
me the most famous fitness
tracker I think is Fitbit.
And you want the fitness tracker to serve
as motivation for greater mobility.
And you're gonna do a clinical
trial where you randomize
half of your subjects to receive a Fitbit,
and the control subjects get nothing.
But most clinical trials they get
something like the Fitbit at the end of
the trial to reward them for
being in the study,
in case you were worried about that.
So you're worried that age would
confound the relationship and
ideally, and likely in fact,
the age groups would be
distributed In roughly equal proportions
among the treated and the controls.
However, if you have a smaller study,
something like this might happen.
You might get, at the younger age group,
one person who is a control.
At the middle age group,
three people who are control, and
the high age group in this case,
five people who are control,
and each of those age
groups having six people.
And, then, in this case, age will be
aliased with control status, right, for
the younger ages, fewer controls,
for the higher ages, more controls.
And so if you were to look at
the relationship between the fitness
tracker and measured mobility.
You would then be worried that
it's actually associated with age.
And this would be
an unlucky arrangement and
if you had enough subjects, probably
things would wash out just by probability.
But because you know age is such
an important factor, a priori, you might
wanna force it to be equal within your
age categories you might want to take and
get six people who are age 65 to 70 and
then randomize them on those six people
three to receive the treatment and
three to receive the control and
this is called blocking.
And it's basically, the principle that
if you know that an important source
of explanatory variation exists as
a variable, why don't you control for
it at the onset,
at the stage of the experimental design?
Let's talk about a related problem
when you don't have control over
the experiment, or
when you've conducted the experiment and
realize that there was
some sort of aliasing.
So, for example, you might have
conducted this experiment, and
actually there was an aliasing.
What could you have done?
So you are studying the elderly still and
you are comparing the use of
trackers with mobility, but
you are just observing the collection of
people who self-select into using
fitness trackers versus the controls.
And so you're worried about because it's
an observation study, you're worried about
lots of factors that might confound
the relationship between mobility and
use of a fitness tracker.
However, you're very concerned
about age in specific, so
let's just talk about that one variable,
while we would note, for
a full observational study,
we'd be concerned about lots of things.
But, you're worried about
the age distribution.
The younger subjects are gonna be more
likely to pick up a fitness tracker just
because of level of comfort with
technology and other factors like that.
And so you're worried any
results you see aren't gonna be
really associated with just
differential age distributions.
So how can, what's the most common way
to look at this, to solve this problem.
And this is the idea of adjustment.
And so adjustment is the idea
of looking at the relationship
within levels of
the confounder held fixed.
So we would look at, say for
example, the middle age group,
we would compare the mobility
with the age group held fixed, so
we're still comparing like with like.
Now we may not have equal numbers
of subjects in that age group, but
we will have fixed the age group so age
isn't varying in that comparison, okay?
So there's lots of different
ways to do adjustment.
But perhaps the most common and
straightforward and easiest one to do
is so called regression adjustment.
And this is when if we
want to look at Fitbit or
not as a variable in a regression
analysis, what do we do?
We add age as another variable
in that regressional analysis.
And that performs a sort of adjustment,
and
I'm gonna go through some
examples to show you, but
also go through some examples to show
you that adjustment is why you can get
strange things happening when you add in
a new variable into a regression model.
So here's a pretty simple example,
so here, again, the gray people
are people who self-selected into using
a Fitbit, and the red people are the ones
who are the control,
are the ones who don't use a Fitbit.
And the Y-axis is a measure of mobility,
and the X-axis is a measure of age.
In this set, in this example you can look,
the mean for
the gray faces is higher than
the mean mobility for the red faces.
So the unadjusted effect is large.
As we adjust it we see that there's
this line of mobility with age.
However, and those lines are parallel
we're gonna stick with just the setting
where the lines are parallel
in our examples.
And the lines are parallel, but
the difference between the parallel
lines is about the same as
the difference in the means.
So adjustment didn't really do much in
this case, other than give us peace of
mind that our fact wasn't entirely due
to just differential age distribution.
But notice one reason why
the adjustment didn't change much.
First of all, the data really suggests
that the lines are parallel, but
secondly there's a large overlap.
At every age distribution you see people
with both control and having Fitbits.
Okay, so at every H distribution
there is a lot of overlap.
So there's a lot of data to
directly make this comparison.
Consider this example.
In this example the marginal mean,
the mean for the red group,
disregarding age, is higher than the mean
for the gray group, disregarding age.
However, when we fit the regression
model with age in it,
we fit two parallel lines, and notice
that the parallel lines would suggest
that the gray group is
the higher than the red group.
Okay, that the Fitbit mobility is
higher than the Control mobility.
And what this is an example of this
is an example where the effect
would actually reverse itself.
It would've gone from a significant effect
but in one direction to a significant
effect in the other direction after the
inclusion of age in our regression model.
So this serves as an example to show why
it is when someone is reporting to you to
a data analysis, and you say, okay,
I'm concerned that age might be
causing this problem, and
they run the analysis real quick, and
the effect actually reverses itself,
it's because of a phenomena like this.
I would also notice, look at this
particular example, another hallmark of it
is there's almost no overlap, there's
almost no ages where there's direct data
to compare the fitness trackers with the
use of a fitness tracker with mobility.
Only in this sort of middle age range
is there just a couple of people
who are overlapped.
Otherwise, it's basically the old
people don't use fitness trackers, and
the young people all do
use fitness trackers.
So this data, our results,
our adjusted results will be
heavily dependent on our model.
Here's an example where the marginal mean,
the mean without considering age, for
the control group, the red faces,
is higher than that of the gray group,
again they're lower.
However, when we adjust for age,
notice the lines appear to be the same,
there appears to be no difference.
So, this would be an instance where you
would have a strongly significant effect
if you didn't factor in age,
but once you accounted for
age in your regression model,
it went away.
Okay, everything just
lied on the same line.
So if you disregarded age.
So this is just an example of,
again, how your effect can really change
after the inclusion of another variable.
Oh, and notice again in this one there
isn't a lot of direct overlap; a lot of
instances of direct comparability
between the groups.
If there is a lot of direct comparability
then the adjustment doesn't tend to
change much, and
in this case, here's an instance
where the mean disregarding age of
both groups is about the same, but
when we fit the model adjusted for
age, the two parallel line's we're
fitting will be quite different
in terms of their intercept or the shift
between the lines would be quite high.
And so, this would be an instance of when
it went from a non-significant effect
if we disregarded h, to a highly
significant effect when we thought,
when we included h.
The final example,
I want to make this point one more time,
and what I wanted to say is in this case,
once you fit the model there would be a
big effect between the two parallel lines.
They look very different in this case,
however,
one thing I wanna mention,
in this case there's no overlap.
There's no ages where we observe
both control and treated group or
control and self-selected Fitbit users.
So this the result would be all model and
no data, right?
The comparison we would be making would
be extrapolating the line from the gray
group on upward and extrapolating
the line from the red group downward.
So there's no data overlap
to inform this decision.
This is something to think about
that regression does not handle by itself,
right.
It does not tell you that the comparison
you're making has a lot of data.
So I think it's often good to ask
the people that you're managing
to do some basic plots.
In this case you would want to look at
the correlation of age with Fitbit use and
if it's highly correlated
than that's a problem.
Right, in this case,
you could perfectly pick,
predict their Fitbit usage by their age.
If they were above this middle age rung,
they all used Fitbit and
if they were below that,
they didn't use Fitbit.
And whenever you can,
whenever that can happen.
Whenever your confounder predicts
your regression very well
that you're interested in,
then that's a problem.
Okay, so thanks for
listening to this lecture and
I hope you learned a little bit about two
common strategies, one blocking, something
that we do as part of our experimental
design and another: adjustment,
something that we do after we've
collected data to try and account for
confounding variables that may contaminate
relationships that we're interested in.
Thanks again and
I'll see you in the next lecture.